Now we know how to inject
configuration data.
Let's have a look at how to
implement Feature Toggles.
Why would we do that?
Simply because in an
Agile development process
its critical to be able
to push new features,
new versions, new updates into
production as soon as possible.
But that does not mean that we want
to enable all of the functionality
that we are working on
now. Of course, there's
always the option of creating
a development branch and working on
an unstable feature on that branch,
but long-lived branches are not something
desirable because of the merge
problems they tend to create.
So a popular solution to that
problem is simply encapsulating
a new feature that we are working on in
a so-called Feature Toggle
or Feature Switch,
or as it's also known as Feature Flags.
It's especially useful to control
the visibility of features
in the user interface
but it can also be used
simply to turn on and off
specific endpoints in
microservice in a web service,
for example, if we need to. In a user
interface that is part of the application,
like a multiservice application that
is implemented using Feature Toggles,
we have to be careful to not
accidentally use an endpoint
that is currently hidden.
So it's a common approach to have
an additional endpoint in
our application that returns
all the available APIs that are present
in a particular microservice. Of course,
we have to be careful with
that last option because
it can inadvertently expose
the internal state of development
to the outside clients.
We can combine the Feature Toggles
with the so-called A/B testing,
which enables some new features
to a specific subset users
and then lets all the others still use
the old version of the application.
Of course,
although you can use Feature Toggles to
solve problems in the Agile
development processes,
you have to be aware
that you're introducing
technical debt into your code in the
form of numerous conditional blocks
and that debt has to be
repaid at some point,
otherwise, we will create a code,
we'll end up with code that is
enormously complex to read.
Now with Quarkus, Feature
Toggles are extremely simple.
We just simply have to define
a @ConfigProperty which tests for a
feature, for features availability.
And then simply in a conditional block,
if that feature is enabled,
we enable that features new code,
otherwise we just do not, we just skip that block.
Or if we are replacing old
functionality with new one,
rather than just adding something on top,
we would have a conditional block
where if the new feature is enabled,
we would use a part of the code,
otherwise, we would fall
back to the old code.
It is common when using Feature Toggles
to aggregate all the toggles in
a single configuration class
and of course, that reduces
the duplicate code when the feature
is used or a Feature Toggle
affects several different places,
locations in the code.
So we can define a prefix,
let's say in this example features
and then use @ConfigProperties
with referring to that prefix
and simply either use a class or have
an interface implemented on the fly,
injecting that class wherever we need it,
and then testing for the
features availability.
One additional recommendation which
will also simplify the testing code,
you see that we inject the features class
into the code where we check for
new features availability and then
use a conditional referring
to the field and directly
accessing the the inner
field of the features class.
It is recommended to also implement
the getters for the Boolean features,
especially if it's about
combined features and
say functionality that depends on 1 or
2 or 3 features being enabled.
It allows us to simplify
the access rather than writing
complex conditions in our code.
So in this case,
if a certain bit of functionality,
let's call it feature A,
depends on a new interface feature
being enabled and an
alternativeAlgorithmEnabled,
we can define a method
called isFeatureAEnabled
and then in the code,
simply refer to that method that
returns the state of both toggles.
Then of course in other
locations in the code
which only test for one or the other,
we could access those 2 fields directly.
Let's have a look at how to implement
Feature Toggles in the next exercise.